+++
date = 2019-09-16T18:07:35Z
description = ""
draft = true
slug = "dad"
title = "Dad"

+++

On the evening of September 15th, my Dad passed away. It wasn't terribly sudden, but it certainly was surprising. This photo of my Dad holding my niece Phoebe was taken just a week or two ago. While it is definitely sad and tragic, I'm truly happy that my Dad doesn't have to suffer anymore with Alzheimer's Disease.

One of the worst impacts of the disease was the frustration.  He was almost always frustrated. He felt he needed to be somewhere, but didn't know where. He'd get frustrated when my Mom would redirect him from something he was doing. He didn't know what he was doing or why he couldn't do it, which is frustrating in an of itself, but being told no, only added to the frustration. You'd see his mind trying to work to answer basic questions such as where he was, what he was doing, who was this person and failing over and over again. This progressed from asking the same question a few times until he forgot how to say words. A complete sentence became elusive and eventually actual words went away.

Yet, even through all this frustration, he was still my Dad.

He loved people and dedicated his life to them as a Pastor. To some, a Pastor is someone who gets in front of people and tells them how to live. To others, Pastors may represent someone trying to get money selling snake oil. My Dad, as many people can attest to, tried to reflect the simple message of Jesus to love one another. He didn't condemn or judge, he just loved. When people needed someone to talk to, he'd listen. He sit with people for hours in the hospital, helping families to get through a tragic situation. He would be present for people as they dealt with the challenges of life.

I was a kid through much of this, so I doubt I knew all the details. But I do remember him on "Team Buoy" where he counseled and worked with a family whose daughter was an Olympic hopeful had a tragic accident and spent years in recovery. I remember him leading the funeral service of a friend of mine who had accidentally shot himself. I remember him speeding to the scene when his Firefighter Chaplain radio went off. I remember him taking a sabbatical and installing a sprinkler system to recharge himself by accomplishing something he could see. I remember him apologizing to someone who didn't deserve an apology because the thought of a broken relationship was such a burden to him.

A little while back Lauren and I had lunch with my Dad. We went Applebees. We got our drinks and put our orders in. He saw some people come through the front door and immediately recognized them. He walked over smiling, asking how they were doing and giving them strong hand shakes and half-hugs. I was used to this sort of thing because when we lived in California, everyone knew my Dad. So I was a little surprised he knew these folks, but since he lived in a small town, I figured it made sense. Our food came and we had a good time. At the some point, I went to the restroom and realized these people my Dad greeted and welcomed with such warmth had no idea who he was. Part of me was a little shocked as it was clearly a sign of the dementia, but a the same time, that was just who my Dad was. He wanted to show people they were loved.

Later, my Mom had gotten sick and I had to go stay with my Dad while she was in the hospital. At this point, the dementia was much more severe. I had to argue with him to let me drive him to hospital rather than letting him drive himself. We'd come out of the hospital to go home and we had to look for his car, that he didn't drive. He'd argue with me that it should be there. It was a tough time because I knew he was missing my Mom and was concerned about her. The concern was understood, but it was clear something was missing emotionally. And yet, one day at the hospital, someone mentioned in the elevator they needed prayers. Sure enough, Pastor Rick stepped up and offered to pray for her. He didn't really know what to do at this point, but that didn't hold him back wanting to help. When my Mom did get news she would be coming home, he was really happy. He asked me what I thought about it. The way he asked, it was as though he just heard an exceptionally inspiring sermon by a great speaker. I told him it was really good and that Mom was coming home. This honestly confused him, but at the same time, he was still really happy.

When my Dad was dying, I was able to be there. I had some time alone and I talked to him a bit. He wasn't responsive at this point, but I was hopeful it would help in some way. I told him about how as an adult I realized lessons he tried to teach me when I was a kid. That I understood them now. I told him I remembered when he taught me to drive a stick and that I eventually raced a friend (that my Dad eventually officiated his wedding) in that very car. I told him I remembered a time where I got really upset when he was telling me things I could have done better in a soccer game. I let him know I understood he was just giving me feedback and I now know how important getting feedback is.

It is all still pretty surreal that my Dad is gone. Part of me already said goodbye whenever I'd give him a hug after a visit when his dementia was getting worse. I knew when I visited him last, that things were not good. He deteriorated so fast and seemed to be in such pain. They had trouble getting him to eat or drink. He had lost a lot of weight and seemed really uncomfortable. He was tired and I felt like he just wanted to be comfortable, but he didn't even know what that would be. And yet, he'd still smile at Lauren and I when we smiled at him. He still had the same mannerisms and kindness even though he was in pain.

The whole process of the disease was really hard. I certainly only had glimpses compared to my Mom and Sister. My Mom told me how there were times he would just stop and pray that things would get better. I saw him extremely sad and unable to be with people because it was just too much. It all felt so tragic that someone who gave himself to so many people, had to be disconnected in such a confusing and frustrating way. So, while I'm definitely sad my Dad is gone, I'm also happy that he doesn't have to suffer anymore.
